I was in the mood to see a subversive, almost surreal film of the type that the French are so good at producing. Belle de Jour is a film that I’d always heard of but never seen, in fact I don’t think that I’d seen anything before by Luis Buñuel (though I know he produced the short film Un Chien Andalou, the title of which is screamed by Frank Black in the Pixie’s thrilling song Debaser). Of course, I know Catherine Deneuve. The film met my expectations in that it was shocking, thought-provoking and challenging. It was also very enjoyable to watch. It made me think of Madame Bovary (the bored housewife seeking excitement), but with an added kinky, sado-maschocist edge. The film evokes the fantasies of Séverine, played by Deneuve, very effectively using eerie sound effects to indicate when the events of the film are taking place in her head. Deneuve herself is brilliant, the fragile, beautiful and mysterious centre of the film. Séverine spends much of the time being mistreated by lustful men (with the exception of her husband, who treats her sensitively but is rather distant), making some scenes uncomfortable viewing (there are also reports that Deneuve herself wasn’t treated particularly respectfully by Buñuel while the film was being made). Can we see her decision to work as a prostitute be seen as her attempt to reclaim agency both from men who desire her body and from her husband with whom she is relegated to a role of almost child-like dependency? I felt like I caught some references to Godard’s À Bout de Souffle in the final part of the film, principally the newspaper hawker’s cry of ‘New York Herald Tribune’ and the shooting which brings the story to its conclusion.
