---
layout: post
title: "Thoughts on Uncut Gems"
date: 2020-05-25 00:00:00 +0100
categories: films
---

The film is based around the character of Howard Ratner, a Jewish New York-based jeweller played by Adam Sandler. Howard’s jewelry shop isn’t a high-end boutique store, it’s squirreled away within a bigger building with access controlled via a security door. He does, however, get visits from celebrities who come to look over his goods. One of these, the real-life basketball star Kevin Garnett, plays a key role in the story. Howard is hoping to make a lot of money by auctioning a precious stone he bought from Ethiopia on the black market. He’s not a naturally domineering character, indeed he spends a large part of the film being chased and bullied by thugs trying to collect a debt from him. However, he possesses what seems to be an almost unlimited amount of confidence and persistence, which go with his sparkling earrings. His life is chaotic, he never seems to have a moment of peace and serenity. He’s always trying to make a deal, checking his phone, being intimidated by heavies; he’s in constant motion. He’s a gambler, surely an addict. He’s not a particularly pleasant man; more than once he shouts and swears at people in service positions. He has a wife and 3 children who live in an expensive looking house. Howard doesn’t live with them; he’s moved into an apartment with his much younger girlfriend. The film gains momentum as it unfolds and is propelled to a spectacular, shocking conclusion. Adam Sandler’s performance is very good, well supported by Julia Fox as his girlfriend. There are elements of comedy to the film, as well as those of a thriller and a minor tragedy. The style was different from what I thought it might be, it felt low key and almost naturalistic. I liked this subversion of my expectations, it felt pleasingly disconcerting and helped to immerse me in Howard’s world.